New section "Optimize your CSS" + first article: "Defer unused CSS". (#617)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: content/fast/defer-unused-css/index.md

The report shows the **FCP** metric with a value of "1s", and the Opportunity **Eliminate render-blocking resources**, pointing to the **style.css** file:

<figure>
  <img src="./lighthouse-unoptimized.png"
       alt="Lighthouse report for unoptimized page, showing FCP of '1s' and 'Eliminate blocking resources' under 'Opportunities'" class="screenshot">
</figure>

To visualize how this CSS is actually blocking rendering:

1. Open [the page](https://defer-css-unoptimized.glitch.me/) in Chrome.
1. Press Control+Shift+J or Cmd+Option+J (Mac), to open DevTools.
1. Go to the **Performance** tab and click on the **Reload** button.

On the resulting trace you’ll see that the **FCP** marker is placed immediately after the CSS finishes loading:

<figure>
  <img src="./cdt-perf-unoptimized.png"
       alt="DevTools performance trace for unoptimized page, showing FCP starting after CSS loads." class="screenshot">
</figure>

This means that the browser needs to wait for the whole CSS to be loaded and processed before painting a single pixel on the screen.

## Optimize

> As a first step to optimize this page, you need to know which classes are actually considered “critical”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a first step to optimize this page, you need to know which classes are actually considered "critical".
```

Watch out for smart quotes.

You'll use the the [Coverage Tool](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2017/04/devtools-release-notes#coverage) for that:

1. On DevTools, open the [Command Menu](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/ui#command-menu), by pressing Control+Shift+P or Cmd+Shift+P (Mac).

> 1. Type “Coverage” and select “Show Coverage”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Type "Coverage" and select "Show Coverage".
```

> 1. Click the “Reload” button, to reload the page and start capturing the coverage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click the "Reload" button, to reload the page and start capturing the coverage.
```

* Extract the class definitions marked with green on the report obtained from the coverage tool, and put those classes inside a ```<style>``` block on the head of the page:

```
<style type="text/css">
.accordion-btn {background-color: #ADD8E6;color: #444;cursor: pointer;padding: 18px;width: 100%;border: none;text-align: left;outline: none;font-size: 15px;transition: 0.4s;}.container {padding: 0 18px;display: none;background-color: white;overflow: hidden;}h1 {word-spacing: 5px;color: blue;font-weight: bold;text-align: center;}
</style>
```

* Then, load the rest of the classes asynchronously, by applying the following pattern:

```
<link rel="preload" href="styles.css" as="style" onload="this.onload=null;this.rel='stylesheet'"> 
<noscript><link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css"></noscript>
```

This is not the standard way of loading CSS. Here's how it works:

* ```link rel=”preload” as=”style”``` allows to request the style asynchronously (for more information about ```"preload"```  , check out [this guide](https://web.dev/fast/preload-critical-assets)).
* The ```onload``` attribute on the link allows the CSS to be processed, when it finishes loading.

> * “nulling” the ```onload``` handler once it is used, helps some browsers to avoid re-calling the handler upon switching the rel attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* "nulling" the `onload` handler once it is used helps some browsers avoid re-calling the handler upon switching the rel attribute.
```

does switching the `rel` attribute happen that often? I don't think it's something I've manually done before.

> * The ordinary reference to the stylesheet inside a noscript element works as a fallback, for browsers that don’t execute JS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The reference to the stylesheet inside of a `noscript` element works as a fallback for browsers that don’t execute JavaScript.
```

The [resulting page](https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/) looks exactly like the previous version, even when most of its styles are loaded asynchronously:

<div class="glitch-embed-wrap" style="height: 420px; width: 100%;">
  <iframe
    allow="geolocation; microphone; camera; midi; encrypted-media"
    src="https://glitch.com/embed/#!/embed/defer-css-optimized?path=index.html&previewSize=100&attributionHidden=true"
    alt="defer-css-optimized on Glitch"
    style="height: 100%; width: 100%; border: 0;">
  </iframe>
</div>

## Monitor

> Obtain a new Performance trace with DevTools, now running it on the [optimized page](https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the Devtools to run another **Performance** trace on the [optimized page](https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/). 
```

> The **FCP** marker appears before the page requests the CSS, which means the browser doesn’t need to wait for the CSS to be loaded to start rendering the page:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **FCP** marker appears before the page requests the CSS, which means the browser doesn’t need to wait for the CSS to load before rendering the page:
```

<figure>
  <img src="./cdt-perf-optimized.png"
       alt="DevTools performance trace for unoptimized page, showing FCP starting before CSS loads." class="screenshot">
</figure>

As a final step, run Lighthouse on the optimized page. 

> On the report you’ll see that the FCP page has been reduced in **0.2s** (a 20% improvement!):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the report you’ll see that the FCP page has been reduced by **0.2s** (a 20% improvement!):
```

<figure>
  <img src="./lighthouse-metrics-optimized.png"

>        alt="Lighthouse report, showing an FCP value of '1s'." class="screenshot">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       alt="Lighthouse report, showing an FCP value of '0.8s'." class="screenshot">
```

</figure>

Also, as a result, the **Eliminate render-blocking resources** suggestion is no longer under **Opportunities**, and now belongs to the **Passed Audits** section:

<figure>
  <img src="./lighthouse-opportunities-optimized.png"
       alt="Lighthouse report, showing 'Eliminate blocing resources' on the 'Passed Audits' section." class="screenshot">
</figure>

## Next steps & references

> On this guide you used vanilla code to implement this optimization. In a real production scenario, it’s a good practice use functions like [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS/blob/master/README.md), that can encapsulate this behavior and work well across browsers. As a complement of this, you can use tools like [Critical](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical/blob/master/README.md), which helps extracting and inlining the “Above the Fold” CSS, you did manually on the **Optimize** step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide you used vanilla code to implement this optimization. In a real production scenario, it’s a good practice to use functions like [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS/blob/master/README.md), that can encapsulate this behavior and work well across browsers. As a complement to this, you can use tools like [Critical](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical/blob/master/README.md), which helps extracting and inlining the “Above the Fold” CSS you did manually in the **Optimize** step.
```

> These tools will be covered in an upcoming guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I'd suggest removing this bit because I have a hunch we'll forget to remove it when we publish the other guides.

web_updated_on: 2019-02-17
web_published_on: 2019-02-17
wf_blink_components: N/A
---

# Defer unused CSS

CSS files are [render-blocking resources](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/blocking-resources), meaning that they have to be loaded and processed before the browser can start rendering the page. For this reason, web pages that contain unnecessarily large or unused styles may take longer to render, increasing the likelihood that a user may bounce: 53% of mobile visits bounce if the page does not load [in 3 seconds or less](https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/intl/en-154/insights-inspiration/research-data/need-mobile-speed-how-mobile-latency-impacts-publisher-revenue/).

In this guide, you’ll learn how to defer unused CSS with the goal of optimizing the [Critical Rendering Path](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/critical-rendering-path/), and improving [FCP (First Contentful Paint)](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/first-contentful-paint).

## Loading CSS in a suboptimal way

The following example contains an accordion with three hidden paragraphs of text, each of which is styled with a different class.

> <div class="glitch-embed-wrap" style="height: 420px; width: 100%;">

Author: Shorted the text, to make it one line: https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/.
Thank you!

  <iframe
    allow="geolocation; microphone; camera; midi; encrypted-media"
    src="https://glitch.com/embed/#!/embed/defer-css-unoptimized?path=index.html&previewSize=100&attributionHidden=true"
    alt="defer-css-unoptimized on Glitch"
    style="height: 100%; width: 100%; border: 0;">
  </iframe>
</div>

This page requests a CSS file with eight classes, but not all of them are necessary to render the "visible" content. 

The goal of this guide is to optimize this page, so only the **critical** styles are loaded synchronously, while the rest (like the ones applied to paragraphs), are loaded in a non-blocking way.

## Measure

Run [Lighthouse](https://web.dev/fast/discover-performance-opportunities-with-lighthouse/#run-lighthouse-from-chrome-devtools) on [the page](https://defer-css-unoptimized.glitch.me/) and go to the **Performance** section.

> The report shows the **FCP** metric with a value of "1s", and the opportunity **Eliminate render-blocking resources**, pointing to the **style.css** file:

Reviewer 2: IMPORTANT: I ran lighthouse on the page-- and I don't see the opportunity for deferring unused css-- it is showing up in passed audits.

> The report shows the **FCP** metric with a value of "1s", and the opportunity **Eliminate render-blocking resources**, pointing to the **style.css** file:

Author: Thanks Meggin.

Regarding LH: It seems like, being this a relatively small CSS file, LH shows "Defer unused CSS" as "Passed", while "Eliminate render-blocking resources" it's still being shown as opportunity.
For that reason, I used the latter show the impact before/after implementing this optimization, but it's true that's not "exactly" the suggestion we are trying to demonstrate.

Some ideas to improve this:

- Adding a note explaining that "Defer unused CSS" doesn't show up, because it's a small file.
- Removing the LH opportunity improvement, to avoid confusions, and focusing only on metrics improvements.
- Modifying the demo (maybe using a larger CSS), to make the LH test fail first. 

I personally like the last one, but wouldn't like to end up having a demo that's so large that it ends up making it less readable for developers.
I saw this same problem when working on other demos as well.

Any thoughts are welcomed.

> The report shows the **FCP** metric with a value of "1s", and the opportunity **Eliminate render-blocking resources**, pointing to the **style.css** file:

Reviewer 2: So focusing on the opportunity to eliminate render-blocking resources might work. Maybe try that?

> The report shows the **FCP** metric with a value of "1s", and the opportunity **Eliminate render-blocking resources**, pointing to the **style.css** file:

Author: Exactly. 
So, at the beginning of the article, I'm using the "Eliminate render-blocking resources" Opportunity, which appears when running LH on the non-optimized page:

https://lighthouse-dot-webdotdevsite.appspot.com/lh/html?url=https://defer-css-unoptimized.glitch.me/

After applying the optimization, that opportunity moves to "Passed Audits" (and the whole "Opportunities" section disappear, as you can see here:

https://lighthouse-dot-webdotdevsite.appspot.com/lh/html?url=https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/

If you think that's ok, now that it's clear why I didn't use the "Defer unused CSS" one, we can leave it in that way.

<figure>
  <img src="./cdt-perf-unoptimized.png"
       alt="DevTools performance trace for unoptimized page, showing FCP starting after CSS loads." class="screenshot">
</figure>

This means that the browser needs to wait for the whole CSS to be loaded and processed before painting a single pixel on the screen.

## Optimize

To optimize this page, you need to know which classes are considered “critical”.
You'll use the the [Coverage Tool](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2017/04/devtools-release-notes#coverage) for that:

1. In DevTools, open the [Command Menu](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/ui#command-menu), by pressing Control+Shift+P or Cmd+Shift+P (Mac).
1. Type "Coverage" and select "Show Coverage".
1. Click the "Reload" button, to reload the page and start capturing the coverage.

<br/>

<figure>
  <img src="./coverage-unoptimized.png"
       alt="Coverage for CSS file, showing 55.9% unused bytes." class="screenshot">
</figure>

Double-click on the report, to see classes marked in two colors:

* Green (**critical**): These are the classes the browser needs to render the visible content (like the title, subtitle, and accordion buttons).

> * Red (**non-critical**): These styles are applied to content that's not immediately visible (like the paragraphs that appear after clicking on each button). Additionally, class definitions like "h2" are not even used on this page.

Reviewer 2: A little leaning... "These styles apply to content that's not even used on the page, like "h2", as well as content that's not immediately visible (like the paragraphs inside the accordions).

> With this information, you'll apply an optimization to let the browser start processing the critical styles immediately after the page loads, while deferring the load of the non-critical CSS for later:

Reviewer 2: A little learning... "With this information, optimize your CSS so that the browser starts processing critical styles immediately after page loads, while deferring non-critical CSS for later:"

* Extract the class definitions marked with green in the report obtained from the coverage tool, and put those classes inside a `<style>` block at the head of the page:

> 

Reviewer 2: General comment that I think it might be helpful to see this work done in a Glitch, so the developer can see in a more hands on way how to separate critical from non-critical styles.

Author: Thanks Meggin,

This article contains two glitches: the non-optmized version, and the optimized one.
On this suggestion do you mean creating an intermediary step (a new Glitch), showing how to apply this step alone?

Reviewer 2: Maybe instead of showing output of the optimized version, you can show the code demonstrating where the different bits have moved to. That might work?

Author: Got it! So then i can add a Glitch embed on that part of the code, instead using the type of embed to  pre-visualize the page.

```
<style type="text/css">
.accordion-btn {background-color: #ADD8E6;color: #444;cursor: pointer;padding: 18px;width: 100%;border: none;text-align: left;outline: none;font-size: 15px;transition: 0.4s;}.container {padding: 0 18px;display: none;background-color: white;overflow: hidden;}h1 {word-spacing: 5px;color: blue;font-weight: bold;text-align: center;}
</style>
```

* Then, load the rest of the classes asynchronously, by applying the following pattern:

```
<link rel="preload" href="styles.css" as="style" onload="this.onload=null;this.rel='stylesheet'"> 
<noscript><link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.css"></noscript>
```

This is not the standard way of loading CSS. Here's how it works:

* `link rel="preload" as="style"` requests the stylesheet asynchronously. You can learn more about `preload` in the [Preload critical assets guide](https://web.dev/fast/preload-critical-assets).
* The `onload` attribute in the `link` allows the CSS to be processed when it finishes loading.

> * "nulling" the `onload` handler once it is used helps some browsers avoid re-calling the handler upon switching the rel attribute.

Reviewer 2: RE the nullying handler, is there something you could point to as a link for more information? I'm not fully sure what this means-- and I'd say others might have the same curiosity?

Author: On the initial version of this article, I was using the pattern explained [here](https://developers.google.com/speed/docs/insights/OptimizeCSSDelivery) to load the CSS file asynchronously.

After a suggestion made by Addy, I moved to the one that appears on this version, since it was the one used by [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS).

"nulling the onload handler" is one of the recommendations made on the documentation of that function, in order to avoid the behavior of some browser, that call the onload handler again when the "rel" attribute changes.

* The reference to the stylesheet inside of a `noscript` element works as a fallback for browsers that don’t execute JavaScript.

> The [resulting page](https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/) looks exactly like the previous version, even when most of its styles are loaded asynchronously:

Reviewer 2: Small leaning to try and get into one line: "even when most styles load asynchronously". This should get all the content on one line.

<div class="glitch-embed-wrap" style="height: 420px; width: 100%;">
  <iframe
    allow="geolocation; microphone; camera; midi; encrypted-media"
    src="https://glitch.com/embed/#!/embed/defer-css-optimized?path=index.html&previewSize=100&attributionHidden=true"
    alt="defer-css-optimized on Glitch"
    style="height: 100%; width: 100%; border: 0;">
  </iframe>
</div>

## Monitor

> Use the Devtools to run another **Performance** trace on the [optimized page](https://defer-css-optimized.glitch.me/). 

Reviewer 2: Small nit to be consistent. DevTools instead of Devtools.

The **FCP** marker appears before the page requests the CSS, which means the browser doesn’t need to wait for the CSS to load before rendering the page:

<figure>
  <img src="./cdt-perf-optimized.png"
       alt="DevTools performance trace for unoptimized page, showing FCP starting before CSS loads." class="screenshot">
</figure>

As a final step, run Lighthouse on the optimized page. 

In the report you’ll see that the FCP page has been reduced by **0.2s** (a 20% improvement!):

<figure>
  <img src="./lighthouse-metrics-optimized.png"
       alt="Lighthouse report, showing an FCP value of '0.8s'." class="screenshot">
</figure>

> Also, as a result, the **Eliminate render-blocking resources** suggestion is no longer under **Opportunities**, and now belongs to the **Passed Audits** section:

Reviewer 2: Suggestion to lean this a little-- remove 'also as a result'... "The Eliminate render-blocking resources suggestion is no longer under Opportunities, and now belongs in the Passed Audits section:

<figure>
  <img src="./lighthouse-opportunities-optimized.png"
       alt="Lighthouse report, showing 'Eliminate blocing resources' on the 'Passed Audits' section." class="screenshot">
</figure>

## Next steps & references

> In this guide you used vanilla code to implement this optimization. In a real production scenario, it’s a good practice to use functions like [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS/blob/master/README.md), that can encapsulate this behavior and work well across browsers. As a complement to this, you can use tools like [Critical](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical/blob/master/README.md), which helps extracting and inlining the “Above the Fold” CSS you did manually in the **Optimize** step.

Reviewer 2: Small nit to add a comment after 'In this guide,'

> In this guide you used vanilla code to implement this optimization. In a real production scenario, it’s a good practice to use functions like [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS/blob/master/README.md), that can encapsulate this behavior and work well across browsers. As a complement to this, you can use tools like [Critical](https://github.com/addyosmani/critical/blob/master/README.md), which helps extracting and inlining the “Above the Fold” CSS you did manually in the **Optimize** step.

Reviewer 2: General comment that I think it would be very cool to show developers how to use loadCSS and the Critical tool, as part of optimizing CSS story-- rather than pointing off to the generic resources.

Is this something that could be in a next guide? Or maybe a codelab? This is really my main comment-- I'd like to see these ideas explained more interactively.

Author: According to @addyosmani, there is a guide that @mihajlija is working on.
The idea was to add a reference to that guide at this part of the article, once is ready, instead to just the links to the tools.

Reviewer 2: Perfect. That sounds great.
